<div style="float:right">
\_\_TOC\_\_

</div>
Contents
--------

**Part I: Commodities and Money**

-   [Ch. 1: Commodities](/Chapter 1 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 2: Exchange](/Chapter 2 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 3: Money, or the Circulation of
    Commodities](/Chapter 3 "wikilink")

**Part II: The Transformation of Money in Capital**

-   [Ch. 4: The General Formula for Capital](/Chapter 4 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of
    Capital](/Chapter 5 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 6: The Buying and Selling of
    Labour-Power](/Chapter 6 "wikilink")

**Part III: The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value**

-   [Ch. 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing
    Surplus-Value](/Chapter 7 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 8: Constant Capital and Variable
    Capital](/Chapter 8 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value](/Chapter 9 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 10: The Working-Day](/Chapter 10 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 11: Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value](/Chapter 11 "wikilink")

**Part IV: Production of Relative Surplus Value**

-   [Ch. 12: The Concept of Relative
    Surplus-Value](/Chapter 12 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 13: Co-operation](/Chapter 13 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture](/Chapter 14 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 15: Machinery and Modern Industry](/Chapter 15 "wikilink")

**Part V: The Production of Absolute and of Relative Surplus-Value**

-   [Ch. 16: Absolute and Relative
    Surplus-Value](/Chapter 16 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 17: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in
    Surplus-Value](/Chapter 17 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 18: Various Formula for the Rate of
    Surplus-Value](/Chapter 18 "wikilink")

**Part VI: Wages**

-   [Ch. 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of
    Labour-Power into Wages](/Chapter 19 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 20: Time-Wages](/Chapter 20 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 21: Piece-Wages](/Chapter 21 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 22: National Differences of Wages](/Chapter 22 "wikilink")

**Part VII: The Accumulation of Capital**

-   [Ch. 23: Simple Reproduction](/Chapter 23 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 24: Conversion of Surplus-Value into
    Capital](/Chapter 24 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 25: The General Law of Capitalist
    Accumulation](/Chapter 25 "wikilink")

**Part VIII: Primitive Accumulation**

-   [Ch. 26: The Secret of Primitive
    Accumulation](/Chapter 26 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 27: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the
    Land](/Chapter 27 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 28: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End
    of the 15th Century. Forcing down of Wages by Acts of
    Parliament](/Chapter 28 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer](/Chapter 29 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 30: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry.
    Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial
    Capital](/Chapter 30 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 31: Genesis of the Industrial
    Capitalist](/Chapter 31 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist
    Accumulation](/Chapter 32 "wikilink")
-   [Ch. 33: The Modern Theory of Colonisation](/Chapter 33 "wikilink")

Prefaces and afterwords
-----------------------

### 1867: Dedication to Wilhelm Wolff

<center>
**TO MY UNFORGETTABLE FRIEND\
*<font color="#FF0000">W i l h e l m</font>*\
*<font color="#FF0000">W o l f f</font>*\
 INTREPID, FAITHFUL,\
 NOBLE PROTAGONIST OF THE PROLETARIAT\
 Born in Tarnau on June 21, 1809\
 Died in exile in Manchester on May 9, 1864**

</center>
### 1867: Preface to the First German Edition (Marx)

The work, the first volume of which I now submit to the public, forms
the continuation of my *[Zur Kritik der Politischen
Oekonomie](http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1850/pol-econ/index.htm)*
(*A Contribution to the Criticism of Political Economy*) published in
1859. The long pause between the first part and the continuation is due
to an illness of many years' duration that again and again interrupted
my work.

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in the first three
chapters of this volume. This is done not merely for the sake of
connexion and completeness. The presentation of the subject-matter is
improved. As far as circumstances in any way permit, many points only
hinted at in the earlier book are here worked out more fully, whilst,
conversely, points worked out fully there are only touched upon in this
volume. The sections on the history of the theories of value and of
money are now, of course, left out altogether. The reader of the earlier
work will find, however, in the notes to the first chapter additional
sources of reference relative to the history of those theories.

Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the
first chapter, especially the section that contains the analysis of
commodities, will, therefore, present the greatest difficulty. That
which concerns more especially the analysis of the substance of value
and the magnitude of value, I have, as much as it was possible,
popularised. <span class="note"></span> The value-form, whose fully
developed shape is the money-form, is very elementary and simple.
Nevertheless, the human mind has for more than 2,000 years sought in
vain to get to the bottom of it all, whilst on the other hand, to the
successful analysis of much more composite and complex forms, there has
been at least an approximation. Why? Because the body, as an organic
whole, is more easy of study than are the cells of that body. In the
analysis of economic forms, moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical
reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both. But in
bourgeois society, the commodity-form of the product of labour  or
value-form of the commodity  is the economic cell-form. To the
superficial observer, the analysis of these forms seems to turn upon
minutiae. It does in fact deal with minutiae, but they are of the same
order as those dealt with in microscopic anatomy.

With the exception of the section of value-form, therefore, this volume
cannot stand accused on the score of difficulty. I pre-suppose, of
course, a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to
think for himself.

The physicist either observes physical phenomena where they occur in
their most typical form and most free from disturbing influence, or,
wherever possible, he makes experiments under conditions that assure the
occurrence of the phenomenon in its normality. In this work I have to
examine the capitalist mode of production, and the conditions of
production and exchange corresponding to that mode. Up to the present
time, their classic ground is England. That is the reason why England is
used as the chief illustration in the development of my theoretical
ideas. If, however, the German reader shrugs his shoulders at the
condition of the English industrial and agricultural labourers, or in
optimist fashion comforts himself with the thought that in Germany
things are not nearly so bad; I must plainly tell him, "De te fabula
narratur!"

Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree of
development of the social antagonisms that result from the natural laws
of capitalist production. It is a question of these laws themselves, of
these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevitable results.
The country that is more developed industrially only shows, to the less
developed, the image of its own future.

But apart from this. Where capitalist production is fully naturalised
among the Germans (for instance, in the factories proper) the condition
of things is much worse than in England, because the counterpoise of the
Factory Acts is wanting. In all other spheres, we, like all the rest of
Continental Western Europe, suffer not only from the development of
capitalist production, but also from the incompleteness of that
development. Alongside the modern evils, a whole series of inherited
evils oppress us, arising from the passive survival of antiquated modes
of production, with their inevitable train of social and political
anachronisms. We suffer not only from the living, but from the dead. *Le
mort saisit le vif!*

The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental Western
Europe are, in comparison with those of England, wretchedly compiled.
But they raise the veil just enough to let us catch a glimpse of the
Medusa head behind it. We should be appalled at the state of things at
home, if, as in England, our governments and parliaments appointed
periodically commissions of inquiry into economic conditions; if these
commissions were armed with the same plenary powers to get at the truth;
if it was possible to find for this purpose men as competent, as free
from partisanship and respect of persons as are the English
factory-inspectors, her medical reporters on public health, her
commissioners of inquiry into the exploitation of women and children,
into housing and food. Perseus wore a magic cap down over his eyes and
ears as a make-believe that there are no monsters.

Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, the
American war of independence sounded the tocsin for the European
middle-class, so that in the 19th century, the American Civil War
sounded it for the European working-class. In England the process of
social disintegration is palpable. When it has reached a certain point,
it must react on the Continent. There it will take a form more brutal or
more humane, according to the degree of development of the working-class
itself. Apart from higher motives, therefore, their own most important
interests dictate to the classes that are for the nonce the ruling ones,
the removal of all legally removable hindrances to the free development
of the working-class. For this reason, as well as others, I have given
so large a space in this volume to the history, the details, and the
results of English factory legislation. One nation can and should learn
from others. And even when a society has got upon the right track for
the discovery of the natural laws of its movement  and it is the
ultimate aim of this work, to lay bare the economic law of motion of
modern society  it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor remove by legal
enactments, the obstacles offered by the successive phases of its normal
development. But it can shorten and lessen the birth-pangs.

To prevent possible misunderstand, a word. I paint the capitalist and
the landlord in no sense *couleur de rose*. But here individuals are
dealt with only in so far as they are the personifications of economic
categories, embodiments of particular class-relations and
class-interests. My standpoint, from which the evolution of the economic
formation of society is viewed as a process of natural history, can less
than any other make the individual responsible for relations whose
creature he socially remains, however much he may subjectively raise
himself above them.

In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific inquiry meets not
merely the same enemies as in all other domains. The peculiar nature of
the materials it deals with, summons as foes into the field of battle
the most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human breast, the
Furies of private interest. The English Established Church, e.g., will
more readily pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles than on 1/39 of
its income. Now-a-days atheism is *culpa levis*, as compared with
criticism of existing property relations. Nevertheless, there is an
unmistakable advance. I refer, e.g., to the Blue book published within
the last few weeks: "Correspondence with Her Majesty's Missions Abroad,
regarding Industrial Questions and Trades' Unions". The representatives
of the English Crown in foreign countries there declare in so many words
that in Germany, in France,to be brief, in all the civilised states of
the European Continent, radical change in the existing relations between
capital and labour is as evident and inevitable as in England. At the
same time, on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, Mr. Wade,
vice-president of the United States, declared in public meetings that,
after the abolition of slavery, a radical change of the relations of
capital and of property in land is next upon the order of the day. These
are signs of the times, not to be hidden by purple mantles or black
cassocks. They do not signify that tomorrow a miracle will happen. They
show that, within the ruling-classes themselves, a foreboding is
dawning, that the present society is no solid crystal, but an organism
capable of change, and is constantly changing.

The second volume of this book will treat of the process of the
circulation of capital (Book II.), and of the varied forms assumed by
capital in the course of its development (Book III.), the third and last
volume (Book IV.), the history of the theory.

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. As to prejudices
of so-called public opinion, to which I have never made concessions, now
as aforetime the maxim of the great Florentine is mine:

"Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti."

**''Karl Marx**''\
**London**\
**July 25, 1867**

* * * * *

#### Footnotes

<span class="note"></span> This is the more necessary, as even the
section of Ferdinand Lassalle's work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which
he professes to give "the intellectual quintessence" of my explanations
on these subjects, contains important mistakes. If Ferdinand Lassalle
has borrowed almost literally from my writings, and without any
acknowledgement, all the general theoretical propositions in his
economic works, e.g., those on the historical character of capital, on
the connexion between the conditions of production and the mode of
production, &c., &c., even to the terminology created by me, this may
perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda. I am here, of course, not
speaking of his detailed working out and application of these
propositions, with which I have nothing to do.

 

* * * * *

Transcribed by Zodiac\
 Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1872: Preface to the French Edition (Marx)

To the citizen Maurice Lachatre

Dear Citizen,

I applaud your idea of publishing the translation of "Das Kapital" as a
serial. In this form the book will be more accessible to the working
class, a consideration which to me outweighs everything else.

That is the good side of your suggestion, but here is the reverse of the
medal: the method of analysis which I have employed, and which had not
previously been applied to economic subjects, makes the reading of the
first chapters rather arduous, and it is to be feared that the French
public, always impatient to come to a conclusion, eager to know the
connexion between general principles and the immediate questions that
have aroused their passions, may be disheartened because they will be
unable to move on at once.

That is a disadvantage I am powerless to overcome, unless it be by
forewarning and forearming those readers who zealously seek the truth.
There is no royal road to science, and only those who do not dread the
fatiguing climb of its steep paths have a chance of gaining its luminous
summits.

   

**''Karl Marx**''\
**London\
March 18, 1872**

* * * * *

Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls\
 Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1873: Afterword to the Second German Edition (Marx)

I must start by informing the readers of the first edition about the
alterations made in the second edition. One is struck at once by the
clearer arrangement of the book. Additional notes are everywhere marked
as notes to the second edition. The following are the most important
points with regard to the text itself:

In [Chapter I, Section
1](Das_Kapital_%28English%29/Chapter_1#Section_1_-_The_Two_Factors_of_a_Commodity:_Use-Value_and_Value_.28The_Substance_of_Value_and_the_Magnitude_of_Value.29 "wikilink"),
the derivation of value from an analysis of the equations by which every
exchange-value is expressed has been carried out with greater scientific
strictness; likewise the connexion between the substance of value and
the determination of the magnitude of value by socially necessary
labour-time, which was only alluded to in the first edition, is now
expressly emphasised. [Chapter I, Section
3](Das_Kapital %28English%29/Chapter 1#Section_3_-_The_Form_of_Value_or_Exchange-Value "wikilink")
(the Form of Value), has been completely revised, a task which was made
necessary by the double exposition in the first edition, if nothing
else.  Let me remark, in passing, that that double exposition had been
occasioned by my friend, Dr. L Kugelmann in Hanover. I was visiting him
in the spring of 1867 when the first proof-sheets arrived from Hamburg,
and he convinced me that most readers needed a supplementary, more
didactic explanation of the form of value.  The last section of the
first chapter, "The Fetishism of Commodities, etc.," has largely been
altered. Chapter III, Section I (The Measure of Value), has been
carefully revised, because in the first edition this section had been
treated negligently, the reader having been referred to the explanation
already given in "Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie," Berlin 1859.
Chapter VII, particularly Part 2 [Eng. ed., [Chapter IX, Section
2](Das_Kapital_%28English%29/Chapter_9#Section_2_-_The_Representation_of_the_Components_of_the_Value_of_the_Product_by_Corresponding_Proportional_Parts_of_the_Product_itself "wikilink")
], has been re-written to a great extent.

It would be a waste of time to go into all the partial textual changes,
which were often purely stylistic. They occur throughout the book.
Nevertheless I find now, on revising the French translation appearing in
Paris, that several parts of the German original stand in need of rather
thorough remoulding, other parts require rather heavy stylistic editing,
and still others painstaking elimination of occasional slips. But there
was no time for that. For I had been informed only in the autumn of
1871, when in the midst of other urgent work, that the book was sold out
and that the printing of the second edition was to begin in January of
1872.

The appreciation which "Das Kapital" rapidly gained in wide circles of
the German working-class is the best reward of my labours. Herr Mayer, a
Vienna manufacturer, who in economic matters represents the bourgeois
point of view, in a pamphlet published during the Franco-German War
aptly expounded the idea that the great capacity for theory, which used
to be considered a hereditary German possession, had almost completely
disappeared amongst the so-called educated classes in Germany, but that
amongst its working-class, on the contrary, that capacity was
celebrating its revival.

To the present moment Political Economy, in Germany, is a foreign
science. Gustav von Gulich in his "Historical description of Commerce,
Industry," &c., <span class="note"></span> especially in the two first
volumes published in 1830, has examined at length the historical
circumstances that prevented, in Germany, the development of the
capitalist mode of production, and consequently the development, in that
country, of modern bourgeois society. Thus the soil whence Political
Economy springs was wanting. This "science" had to be imported from
England and France as a ready-made article; its German professors
remained schoolboys. The theoretical expression of a foreign reality was
turned, in their hands, into a collection of dogmas, interpreted by them
in terms of the petty trading world around them, and therefore
misinterpreted. The feeling of scientific impotence, a feeling not
wholly to be repressed, and the uneasy consciousness of having to touch
a subject in reality foreign to them, was but imperfectly concealed,
either under a parade of literary and historical erudition, or by an
admixture of extraneous material, borrowed from the so-called "Kameral"
sciences, a medley of smatterings, through whose purgatory the hopeful
candidate for the German bureaucracy has to pass.

Since 1848 capitalist production has developed rapidly in Germany, and
at the present time it is in the full bloom of speculation and
swindling. But fate is still unpropitious to our professional
economists. At the time when they were able to deal with Political
Economy in a straightforward fashion, modern economic conditions did not
actually exist in Germany. And as soon as these conditions did come into
existence, they did so under circumstances that no longer allowed of
their being really and impartially investigated within the bounds of the
bourgeois horizon. In so far as Political Economy remains within that
horizon, in so far, i.e., as the capitalist regime is looked upon as the
absolutely final form of social production, instead of as a passing
historical phase of its evolution, Political Economy can remain a
science only so long as the class-struggle is latent or manifests itself
only in isolated and sporadic phenomena.

Let us take England. Its Political Economy belongs to the period in
which the class-struggle was as yet undeveloped. Its last great
representative, Ricardo, in the end, consciously makes the antagonism of
class interests, of wages and profits, of profits and rent, the
starting-point of his investigations, naively taking this antagonism for
a social law of Nature. But by this start the science of bourgeois
economy had reached the limits beyond which it could not pass. Already
in the lifetime of Ricardo, and in opposition to him, it was met by
criticism, in the person of Sismondi. <span class="note"></span>

The succeeding period, from 1820 to 1830, was notable in England for
scientific activity in the domain of Political Economy. It was the time
as well of the vulgarising and extending of Ricardo's theory, as of the
contest of that theory with the old school. Splendid tournaments were
held. What was done then, is little known to the Continent generally,
because the polemic is for the most part scattered through articles in
reviews, occasional literature and pamphlets. The unprejudiced character
of this polemic  although the theory of Ricardo already serves, in
exceptional cases, as a weapon of attack upon bourgeois economy  is
explained by the circumstances of the time. On the one hand, modern
industry itself was only just emerging from the age of childhood, as is
shown by the fact that with the crisis of 1825 it for the first time
opens the periodic cycle of its modern life. On the other hand, the
class-struggle between capital and labour is forced into the background,
politically by the discord between the governments and the feudal
aristocracy gathered around the Holy Alliance on the one hand, and the
popular masses, led by the bourgeoisie, on the other; economically by
the quarrel between industrial capital and aristocratic landed property-
-a quarrel that in France was concealed by the opposition between small
and large landed property, and that in England broke out openly after
the Corn Laws. The literature of Political Economy in England at this
time calls to mind the stormy forward movement in France after Dr.
Quesnay's death, but only as a Saint Martin's summer reminds us of
spring. With the year 1830 came the decisive crisis.

In France and in England the bourgeoisie had conquered political power.
Thenceforth, the class-struggle, practically as well as theoretically,
took on more and more outspoken and threatening forms. It sounded the
knell of scientific bourgeois economy. It was thenceforth no longer a
question, whether this theorem or that was true, but whether it was
useful to capital or harmful, expedient or inexpedient, politically
dangerous or not. In place of disinterested inquirers, there were hired
prize fighters; in place of genuine scientific research, the bad
conscience and the evil intent of apologetic. Still, even the obtrusive
pamphlets with which the Anti-Corn Law League, led by the manufacturers
Cobden and Bright, deluged the world, have a historic interest, if no
scientific one, on account of their polemic against the landed
aristocracy. But since then the Free-trade legislation, inaugurated by
Sir Robert Peel, has deprived vulgar economy of this its last sting.

The Continental revolution of 1848-9 also had its reaction in England.
Men who still claimed some scientific standing and aspired to be
something more than mere sophists and sycophants of the ruling-classes
tried to harmonise the Political Economy of capital with the claims, no
longer to be ignored, of the proletariat. Hence a shallow syncretism of
which John Stuart Mill is the best representative. It is a declaration
of bankruptcy by bourgeois economy, an event on which the great Russian
scholar and critic, N. Tschernyschewsky, has thrown the light of a
master mind in his "Outlines of Political Economy according to Mill."

In Germany, therefore, the capitalist mode of production came to a head,
after its antagonistic character had already, in France and England,
shown itself in a fierce strife of classes. And meanwhile, moreover, the
German proletariat had attained a much more clear class-consciousness
than the German bourgeoisie. Thus, at the very moment when a bourgeois
science of Political Economy seemed at last possible in Germany, it had
in reality again become impossible.

Under these circumstances its professors fell into two groups. The one
set, prudent, practical business folk, flocked to the banner of Bastiat,
the most superficial and therefore the most adequate representative of
the apologetic of vulgar economy; the other, proud of the professorial
dignity of their science, followed John Stuart Mill in his attempt to
reconcile irreconcilables. Just as in the classical time of bourgeois
economy, so also in the time of its decline, the Germans remained mere
schoolboys, imitators and followers, petty retailers and hawkers in the
service of the great foreign wholesale concern.

The peculiar historical development of German society therefore forbids,
in that country, all original work in bourgeois economy; but not the
criticism of that economy. So far as such criticism represents a class,
it can only represent the class whose vocation in history is the
overthrow of the capitalist mode of production and the final abolition
of all classes  the proletariat.

The learned and unlearned spokesmen of the German bourgeoisie tried at
first to kill "Das Kapital" by silence, as they had managed to do with
my earlier writings. As soon as they found that these tactics no longer
fitted in with the conditions of the time, they wrote, under pretence of
criticising my book, prescriptions "for the tranquillisation of the
bourgeois mind." But they found in the workers' press  see, e.g.,
Joseph Dietzgen's articles in the Volksstaat  antagonists stronger than
themselves, to whom (down to this very day) they owe a reply.
<span class="note"></span>

An excellent Russian translation of "Das Kapital" appeared in the spring
of 1872. The edition of 3,000 copies is already nearly exhausted. As
early as 1871, N. Sieber, Professor of Political Economy in the
University of Kiev, in his work "David Ricardo's Theory of Value and of
Capital," referred to my theory of value, of money and of capital, as in
its fundamentals a necessary sequel to the teaching of Smith and
Ricardo. That which astonishes the Western European in the reading of
this excellent work, is the author's consistent and firm grasp of the
purely theoretical position.

That the method employed in "Das Kapital" has been little understood, is
shown by the various conceptions, contradictory one to another, that
have been formed of it.

Thus the Paris Revue Positiviste reproaches me in that, on the one hand,
I treat economics metaphysically, and on the other hand  imagine! 
confine myself to the mere critical analysis of actual facts, instead of
writing receipts (Comtist ones?) for the cook-shops of the future. In
answer to the reproach in re metaphysics, Professor Sieber has it: "In
so far as it deals with actual theory, the method of Marx is the
deductive method of the whole English school, a school whose failings
and virtues are common to the best theoretic economists." M. Block 
"Les Theoriciens du Socialisme en Allemagne. Extrait du Journal des
Economistes, Juillet et Aout 1872"  makes the discovery that my method
is analytic and says: "Par cet ouvrage M. Marx se classe parmi les
esprits analytiques les plus eminents." German reviews, of course,
shriek out at "Hegelian sophistics." The European Messenger of St.
Petersburg in an article dealing exclusively with the method of "Das
Kapital" (May number, 1872, pp. 427-436), finds my method of inquiry
severely realistic, but my method of presentation, unfortunately,
German- dialectical. It says: "At first sight, if the judgment is based
on the external form of the presentation of the subject, Marx is the
most ideal of ideal philosophers, always in the German, i.e., the bad
sense of the word. But in point of fact he is infinitely more realistic
than all his forerunners in the work of economic criticism. He can in no
sense be called an idealist." I cannot answer the writer better than by
aid of a few extracts from his own criticism, which may interest some of
my readers to whom the Russian original is inaccessible.

After a quotation from the preface to my "Criticism of Political
Economy," Berlin, 1859, pp. IV-VII, where I discuss the materialistic
basis of my method, the writer goes on:

"The one thing which is of moment to Marx, is to find the law of the
phenomena with whose investigation he is concerned; and not only is that
law of moment to him, which governs these phenomena, in so far as they
have a definite form and mutual connexion within a given historical
period. Of still greater moment to him is the law of their variation, of
their development, i.e., of their transition from one form into another,
from one series of connexions into a different one. This law once
discovered, he investigates in detail the effects in which it manifests
itself in social life. Consequently, Marx only troubles himself about
one thing: to show, by rigid scientific investigation, the necessity of
successive determinate orders of social conditions, and to establish, as
impartially as possible, the facts that serve him for fundamental
starting-points. For this it is quite enough, if he proves, at the same
time, both the necessity of the present order of things, and the
necessity of another order into which the first must inevitably pass
over; and this all the same, whether men believe or do not believe it,
whether they are conscious or unconscious of it. Marx treats the social
movement as a process of natural history, governed by laws not only
independent of human will, consciousness and intelligence, but rather,
on the contrary, determining that will, consciousness and
intelligence.... If in the history of civilisation the conscious element
plays a part so subordinate, then it is self-evident that a critical
inquiry whose subject-matter is civilisation, can, less than anything
else, have for its basis any form of, or any result of, consciousness.
That is to say, that not the idea, but the material phenomenon alone can
serve as its starting-point. Such an inquiry will confine itself to the
confrontation and the comparison of a fact, not with ideas, but with
another fact. For this inquiry, the one thing of moment is, that both
facts be investigated as accurately as possible, and that they actually
form, each with respect to the other, different momenta of an evolution;
but most important of all is the rigid analysis of the series of
successions, of the sequences and concatenations in which the different
stages of such an evolution present themselves. But it will be said, the
general laws of economic life are one and the same, no matter whether
they are applied to the present or the past. This Marx directly denies.
According to him, such abstract laws do not exist. On the contrary, in
his opinion every historical period has laws of its own.... As soon as
society has outlived a given period of development, and is passing over
from one given stage to another, it begins to be subject also to other
laws. In a word, economic life offers us a phenomenon analogous to the
history of evolution in other branches of biology. The old economists
misunderstood the nature of economic laws when they likened them to the
laws of physics and chemistry. A more thorough analysis of phenomena
shows that social organisms differ among themselves as fundamentally as
plants or animals. Nay, one and the same phenomenon falls under quite
different laws in consequence of the different structure of those
organisms as a whole, of the variations of their individual organs, of
the different conditions in which those organs function, &c. Marx, e.g.,
denies that the law of population is the same at all times and in all
places. He asserts, on the contrary, that every stage of development has
its own law of population.... With the varying degree of development of
productive power, social conditions and the laws governing them vary
too. Whilst Marx sets himself the task of following and explaining from
this point of view the economic system established by the sway of
capital, he is only formulating, in a strictly scientific manner, the
aim that every accurate investigation into economic life must have. The
scientific value of such an inquiry lies in the disclosing of the
special laws that regulate the origin, existence, development, death of
a given social organism and its replacement by another and higher one.
And it is this value that, in point of fact, Marx's book has."

Whilst the writer pictures what he takes to be actually my method, in
this striking and [as far as concerns my own application of it] generous
way, what else is he picturing but the dialectic method?

Of course the method of presentation must differ in form from that of
inquiry. The latter has to appropriate the material in detail, to
analyse its different forms of development, to trace out their inner
connexion. Only after this work is done, can the actual movement be
adequately described. If this is done successfully, if the life of the
subject-matter is ideally reflected as in a mirror, then it may appear
as if we had before us a mere a priori construction.

My dialectic method is not only different from the Hegelian, but is its
direct opposite. To Hegel, the life-process of the human brain, i.e.,
the process of thinking, which, under the name of "the Idea," he even
transforms into an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real
world, and the real world is only the external, phenomenal form of "the
Idea." With me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the
material world reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of
thought.

The mystifying side of Hegelian dialectic I criticised nearly thirty
years ago, at a time when it was still the fashion. But just as I was
working at the first volume of "Das Kapital," it was the good pleasure
of the peevish, arrogant, mediocre 'Epigonoi who now talk large in
cultured Germany, to treat Hegel in same way as the brave Moses
Mendelssohn in Lessing's time treated Spinoza, i.e., as a "dead dog." I
therefore openly avowed myself the pupil of that mighty thinker, and
even here and there, in the chapter on the theory of value, coquetted
with the modes of expression peculiar to him. The mystification which
dialectic suffers in Hegel's hands, by no means prevents him from being
the first to present its general form of working in a comprehensive and
conscious manner. With him it is standing on its head. It must be turned
right side up again, if you would discover the rational kernel within
the mystical shell.

In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany, because
it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state of things. In
its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and
its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension and
affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same
time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its
inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically developed
social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its
transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets
nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical and
revolutionary.

The contradictions inherent in the movement of capitalist society
impress themselves upon the practical bourgeois most strikingly in the
changes of the periodic cycle, through which modern industry runs, and
whose crowning point is the universal crisis. That crisis is once again
approaching, although as yet but in its preliminary stage; and by the
universality of its theatre and the intensity of its action it will drum
dialectics even into the heads of the mushroom-upstarts of the new, holy
Prusso-German empire.

**''Karl Marx**''\
**London**\
**January 24, 1873**

* * * * *

#### Footnotes

<span class="note"></span> Geschichtliche Darstellung des Handels, der
Gewerbe und des Ackerbaus, &c.. von Gustav von Gulich. 5 vols., Jena.
1830-45.

<span class="note"></span> See my work "Zur Kritik, &c.," p. 39.

<span class="note"></span> The mealy-mouthed babblers of German vulgar
economy fell foul of the style of my book. No one can feel the literary
shortcomings in "Das Kapital" more strongly than I myself. Yet I will
for the benefit and the enjoyment of these gentlemen and their public
quote in this connexion one English and one Russian notice. The Saturday
Review always hostile to my views, said in its notice of the first
edition: "The presentation of the subject invests the driest economic
questions with a certain peculiar charm." The "St. Petersburg Journal"
(Sankt-Peterburgskie Viedomosti), in its issue of April 8 (20), 1872,
says: "The presentation of the subject, with the exception of one or two
exceptionally special parts, is distinguished by its comprehensibility
by the general reader, its clearness, and, in spite of the scientific
intricacy of the subject, by an unusual liveliness. In this respect the
author in no way resembles ... the majority of German scholars who ...
write their books in a language so dry and obscure that the heads of
ordinary mortals are cracked by it."

 

* * * * *

Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls\
 Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1875: Afterword to the French Edition (Marx)

Mr. J. Roy set himself the task of producing a version that would be as
exact and even literal as possible, and has scrupulously fulfilled it.
But his very scrupulosity has compelled me to modify his text, with a
view to rendering it more intelligible to the reader. These alterations,
introduced from day to day, as the book was published in parts, were not
made with equal care and were bound to result in a lack of harmony in
style.

Having once undertaken this work of revision, I was led to apply it also
to the basic original text (the second German edition), to simplify some
arguments, to complete others, to give additional historical or
statistical material, to add critical suggestions, etc. Hence, whatever
the literary defects of this French edition may be, it possesses a
scientific value independent of the original and should be consulted
even by readers familiar with German.

Below I give the passages in the Afterword to the second German edition
which treat of the development of Political Economy in Germany and the
method employed in the present work.

**''Karl Marx**''\
**London**\
**April 28, 1875**

* * * * *

Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls\
 Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1883: Preface to the Third German Edition (Engels)

Marx was not destined to get this, the third, edition ready for press
himself. The powerful thinker, to whose greatness even his opponents now
make obeisance, died on March 14, 1883.

Upon me who in Marx lost the best, the truest friend I had  and had for
forty years  the friend to whom I am more indebted than can be
expressed in words  upon me now devolved the duty of attending to the
publication of this third edition, as well as of the second volume,
which Marx had left behind in manuscript. I must now account here to the
reader for the way in which I discharged the first part of my duty.

It was Marx's original intention to re-write a great part of the text of
Volume I, to formulate many theoretical points more exactly, insert new
ones and bring historical and statistical materials up to date. But his
ailing condition and the urgent need to do the final editing of Volume
II induced him to give up this scheme. Only the most necessary
alterations were to be made, only the insertions which the French
edition ("Le Capital." Par Karl Marx. Paris, Lachâtre 1873) already
contained, were to be put in.

Among the books left by Marx there was a German copy which he himself
had corrected here and there and provided with references to the French
edition; also a French copy in which he had indicated the exact passages
to be used. These alterations and additions are confined, with few
exceptions, to the last [Engl. ed.: second last] part of the book: "The
Accumulation of Capital." Here the previous text followed the original
draft more closely than elsewhere, while the preceding sections had been
gone over more thoroughly. The style was therefore more vivacious, more
of a single cast, but also more careless, studded with Anglicisms and in
parts unclear; there were gaps here and there in the presentation of
arguments, some important particulars being merely alluded to.

With regard to the style, Marx had himself thoroughly revised several
sub-sections and thereby had indicated to me here, as well as in
numerous oral suggestions, the length to which I could go in eliminating
English technical terms and other Anglicisms. Marx would in any event
have gone over the additions and supplemental texts and have replaced
the smooth French with his own terse German; I had to be satisfied, when
transferring them, with bringing them into maximum harmony with the
original text.

Thus not a single word was changed in this third edition without my firm
conviction that the author would have altered it himself. It would never
occur to me to introduce into "Das Kapital" the current jargon in which
German economists are wont to express themselves  that gibberish in
which, for instance, one who for cash has others give him their labour
is called a labour-''giver *(Arbeit*geber*) and one whose labour is
taken away from him for wages is called a labour-*taker''
(Arbeit*nehmer*). In French, too, the word *"travail*" is used in
every-day life in the sense of "occupation." But the French would
rightly consider any economist crazy should he call the capitalist *a
donneur de travail* (a labour-giver) or the worker a *receveur de
travail* (a labour-taker).

Nor have I taken the liberty to convert the English coins and moneys,
measures and weights used throughout the text to their new-German
equivalents. When the first edition appeared there were as many kinds of
measures and weights in Germany as there are days in the year. Besides
there were two kinds of marks (the Reichsmark existed at the time only
in the imagination of Soetbeer, who had invented it in the late
thirties), two kinds of gulden and at least three kinds of taler,
including one called *neues Zweidrittel*. In the natural sciences the
metric system prevailed, in the world market  English measures and
weights. Under such circumstances English units of measure were quite
natural for a book which had to take its factual proofs almost
exclusively from British industrial relations. The last-named reason is
decisive even to-day, especially because the corresponding relations in
the world market have hardly changed and English weights and measures
almost completely control precisely the key industries, iron and cotton.

In conclusion a few words on Marx's art of quotation, which is so little
understood. When they are pure statements of fact or descriptions, the
quotations, from the English Blue books, for example, serve of course as
simple documentary proof. But this is not so when the theoretical views
of other economists are cited. Here the quotation is intended merely to
state where, when and by whom an economic idea conceived in the course
of development was first clearly enunciated. Here the only consideration
is that the economic conception in question must be of some significance
to the history of science, that it is the more or less adequate
theoretical expression of the economic situation of its time. But
whether this conception still possesses any absolute or relative
validity from the standpoint of the author or whether it already has
become wholly past history is quite immaterial. Hence these quotations
are only a running commentary to the text, a commentary borrowed from
the history of economic science, and establish the dates and originators
of certain of the more important advances in economic theory And that
was a very necessary thing in a science whose historians have so far
distinguished themselves only by tendentious ignorance characteristic of
careerists. It will now be understandable why Marx, in consonance with
the Afterword to the second edition, only in very exceptional eases had
occasion to quote German economists.

There is hope that the second volume will appear in the course of 1884.

**''Frederick Engels**''\
**London**\
**November 7, 1883**

* * * * *

Transcribed by Bert Shultze\
 Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1886: Preface to the English Edition (Engels)

The publication of an English version of "Das Kapital" needs no apology.
On the contrary, an explanation might be expected why this English
version has been delayed until now, seeing that for some years past the
theories advocated in this book have been constantly referred to,
attacked and defended, interpreted and misinterpreted, in the periodical
press and the current literature of both England and America.

When, soon after the author's death in 1883, it became evident that an
English edition of the work was really required, Mr. Samuel Moore, for
many years a friend of Marx and of the present writer, and than whom,
perhaps, no one is more conversant with the book itself, consented to
undertake the translation which the literary executors of Marx were
anxious to lay before the public. It was understood that I should
compare the MS. with the original work, and suggest such alterations as
I might deem advisable. When, by and by, it was found that Mr. Moore's
professional occupations prevented him from finishing the translation as
quickly as we all desired, we gladly accepted Dr. Aveling's offer to
undertake a portion of the work; at the same time Mrs. Aveling, Marx's
youngest daughter, offered to check the quotations and to restore the
original text of the numerous passages taken from English authors and
Blue books and translated by Marx into German. This has been done
throughout, with but a few unavoidable exceptions.

The following portions of the book have been translated by Dr. Aveling:
(I) Chapters X. (The Working-Day), and XI. (Rate and Mass of
Surplus-Value); (2) Part VI. (Wages, comprising Chapters XIX. to XXII.);
(3) from Chapter XXIV., Section 4 (Circumstances that &c.) to the end of
the book, comprising the latter part of Chapter XXIV.,. Chapter XXV.,
and the whole of Part VIII. (Chapters XXVI. to XXXIII); (4) the two
Author's prefaces. All the rest of the book has been done by Mr. Moore.
While, thus, each of the translators is responsible for his share of the
work only, I bear a joint responsibility for the whole.

The third German edition, which has been made the basis of our work
throughout, was prepared by me, in 1883, with the assistance of notes
left by the author, indicating the passages of the second edition to be
replaced by designated passages, from the French text published in 1873.
<span class="note"></span> The alterations thus effected in the text of
the second edition generally coincided with changes prescribed by Marx
in a set of MS. instructions for an English translation that was
planned, about ten years ago, in America, but abandoned chiefly for want
of a fit and proper translator. This MS. was placed at our disposal by
our old friend Mr. F. A. Sorge of Hoboken N. J. It designates some
further interpolations from the French edition; but, being so many years
older than the final instructions for the third edition, I did not
consider myself at liberty to make use of it otherwise than sparingly,
and chiefly in cases where it helped us over difficulties. In the same
way, the French text has been referred to in most of the difficult
passages, as an indicator of what the author himself was prepared to
sacrifice wherever something of the full import of the original had to
be sacrificed in the rendering.

There is, however, one difficulty we could not spare the reader: the use
of certain terms in a sense different from what they have, not only in
common life, but in ordinary Political Economy. But this was
unavoidable. Every new aspect of a science involves a revolution in the
technical terms of that science. This is best shown by chemistry, where
the whole of the terminology is radically changed about once in twenty
years, and where you will hardly find a single organic compound that has
not gone through a whole series of different names. Political Economy
has generally been content to take, just as they were, the terms of
commercial and industrial life, and to operate with them, entirely
failing to see that by so doing, it confined itself within the narrow
circle of ideas expressed by those terms. Thus, though perfectly aware
that both profits and rent are but sub-divisions, fragments of that
unpaid part of the product which the labourer has to supply to his
employer (its first appropriator, though not its ultimate exclusive
owner), yet even classical Political Economy never went beyond the
received notions of profits and rents, never examined this unpaid part
of the product (called by Marx surplus-product) in its integrity as a
whole, and therefore never arrived at a clear comprehension, either of
its origin and nature, or of the laws that regulate the subsequent
distribution of its value. Similarly all industry, not agricultural or
handicraft, is indiscriminately comprised in the term of manufacture,
and thereby the distinction is obliterated between two great and
essentially different periods of economic history: the period of
manufacture proper, based on the division of manual labour, and the
period of modern industry based on machinery. It is, however, self-
evident that a theory which views modern capitalist production as a mere
passing stage in the economic history of mankind, must make use of terms
different from those habitual to writers who look upon that form of
production as imperishable and final.

A word respecting the author's method of quoting may not be out of
place. In the majority of cases, the quotations serve, in the usual way,
as documentary evidence in support of assertions made in the text. But
in many instances, passages from economic writers are quoted in order to
indicate when, where, and by whom a certain proposition was for the
first time clearly enunciated. This is done in cases where the
proposition quoted is of importance as being a more or less adequate
expression of the conditions of social production and exchange prevalent
at the time, and quite irrespective of Marx's recognition, or otherwise,
of its general validity. These quotations, therefore, supplement the
text by a running commentary taken from the history of the science.

Our translation comprises the first book of the work only. But this
first book is in a great measure a whole in itself, and has for twenty
years ranked as an independent work. The second book, edited in German
by me, in 1885, is decidedly incomplete without the third, which cannot
be published before the end of 1887. When Book III. has been brought out
in the original German, it will then be soon enough to think about
preparing an English edition of both.

"Das Kapital" is often called, on the Continent, "the Bible of the
working-class." That the conclusions arrived at in this work are daily
more and more becoming the fundamental principles of the great working-
class movement, not only in Germany and Switzerland, but in France, in
Holland and Belgium, in America, and even in Italy and Spain, that
everywhere the working-class more and more recognises, in these
conclusions, the most adequate expression of its condition and of its
aspirations, nobody acquainted with that movement will deny. And in
England, too, the theories of Marx, even at this moment, exercise a
powerful influence upon the socialist movement which is spreading in the
ranks of "cultured" people no less than in those of the working-class.
But that is not all. The time is rapidly approaching when a thorough
examination of England's economic position will impose itself as an
irresistible national necessity. The working of the industrial system of
this country, impossible without a constant and rapid extension of
production, and therefore of markets, is coming to a dead stop.

Free-trade has exhausted its resources; even Manchester doubts this its
quondam economic gospel. <span class="note"></span> Foreign industry,
rapidly developing, stares English production in the face everywhere,
not only in protected, but also in neutral markets, and even on this
side of the Channel. While the productive power increases in a
geometric, the extension of markets proceeds at best in an arithmetic
ratio. The decennial cycle of stagnation, prosperity, over-production
and crisis, ever recurrent from 1825 to 1867, seems indeed to have run
its course; but only to land us in the slough of despond of a permanent
and chronic depression. The sighed for period of prosperity will not
come; as often as we seem to perceive its heralding symptoms, so often
do they again vanish into air. Meanwhile, each succeeding winter brings
up afresh the great question, "what to do with the unemployed"; but
while the number of the unemployed keeps swelling from year to year,
there is nobody to answer that question; and we can almost calculate the
moment when the unemployed losing patience will take their own fate into
their own hands. Surely, at such a moment, the voice ought to be heard
of a man whose whole theory is the result of a lifelong study of the
economic history and condition of England, and whom that study led to
the conclusion that, at least in Europe, England is the only country
where the inevitable social revolution might be effected entirely by
peaceful and legal means. He certainly never forgot to add that he
hardly expected the English ruling classes to submit, without a
"pro-slavery rebellion," to this peaceful and legal revolution.

**''Frederick Engels**''\
**November 5, 1886**

* * * * *

#### Footnotes

<span class="note"></span> "Le Capital," par Karl Marx. Traduction de
M.J. Roy, entierement revisee par l'auteur. Paris. Lachatre. This
translation, especially in the latter part of the book, contains
considerable alterations in and additions to the text of the second
German edition.

<span class="note"></span> At the quarterly meeting of the Manchester
Chamber of commerce, held this afternoon a warm discussion took place on
the subject of Free-trade. A resolution was moved to the effect that
"having waited in vain 40 years for other nations to follow the
Free-trade example of England, this Chamber thinks the time has now
arrived to reconsider that position. The resolution was rejected by a
majority of one only, the figures being 21 for, and 22 against. 
*Evening Standard*, Nov. 1, 1886.

 

* * * * *

Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1890: Preface to the Fourth German Edition (Engels)

The fourth edition required that I should establish in final form, as
nearly as possible, both text and footnotes. The following brief
explanation will show how I have fulfilled this task.

After again comparing the French edition and Marx's manuscript remarks I
have made some further additions to the German text from that
translation. They will be found on p. 80 (3rd edition, p. 88) [present
edition, pp. 117-18], pp. 458-60 (3rd edition, pp. 509-10) [present
edition, pp. 462-65], <span class="note"></span> pp. 547-51 (3rd
edition, p. 600) [present edition, pp. 548-51], pp. 591-93 (3rd edition,
p. 644) [present edition, 587-89] and p. 596 (3rd edition, p. 648)
[present edition, p. 591] in Note 1. I have also followed the example of
the French and English editions by putting the long footnote on the
miners into the text (3rd edition, pp.509- 15; 4th edition, pp. 461-67)
[present edition, pp. 465-71]. Other small alterations are of a purely
technical nature.

Further, I have added a few more explanatory notes, especially where
changed historical conditions seemed to demand this. All these
additional notes are enclosed in square brackets and marked either with
my initials or "D. H." <span class="note"></span>

Meanwhile a complete revision of the numerous quotations had been made
necessary by the publication of the English edition. For this edition
Marx's youngest daughter, Eleanor, undertook to compare all the
quotations with their originals, so that those taken from English
sources, which constitute the vast majority, are given there not as
re-translations from the German but in the original English form In
preparing the fourth edition it was therefore incumbent upon me to
consult this text. The comparison revealed various small inaccuracies.
Page numbers wrongly indicated, due partly to mistakes in copying from
note-books, and partly to the accumulated misprints of three editions;
misplaced quotation or omission marks, which cannot be avoided when a
mass of quotations is copied from note-book extracts; here and there
some rather unhappy translation of a word; particular passages quoted
from the old Paris note-books of 1843-45, when Marx did not know English
and was reading English economists in French translations, so that the
double translation yielded a slightly different shade of meaning,
*e.g*., in the case of Steuart, Ure, etc., where the English text had
now to be used  and other similar instances of trifling inaccuracy or
negligence. But anyone who compares the fourth edition with the previous
ones can convince himself that all this laborious process of emendation
has not produced the smallest change in the book worth speaking of.
There was only one quotation which could not be traced  the one from
Richard Jones (4th edition, p. 562, note 47). Marx probably slipped up
when writing down the title of the book. <span class="note"></span> All
the other quotations retain their cogency in full, or have enhanced it
due to their present exact form.

Here, however, I am obliged to revert to an old story.

I know of only one case in which the accuracy of a quotation given by
Marx has been called in question. But as the issue dragged beyond his
lifetime I cannot well ignore it here.

On March 7, 1872, there appeared in the Berlin *Concordia*, organ of the
German Manufacturers' Association, an anonymous article entitled: "How
Karl Marx Quotes." It was here asserted, with an effervescence of moral
indignation and unparliamentary language, that the quotation from
Gladstone's Budget Speech of April 16, 1863 (in the [*Inaugural Address*
of the International Workingmen's Association,
1864](http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1864iwma/1864-b.htm),
and repeated in "Capital," Vol. I, p. 617, 4th edition; p. 671, 3rd
edition) [present edition, p. 610], had been falsified; that not a
single word of the sentence: "this intoxicating augmentation of wealth
and power ... is ... entirely confined to classes of property" was to be
found in the (semi-official) stenographic report in Hansard. "But this
sentence is nowhere to be found in Gladstone's speech. Exactly the
opposite is stated there." (In bold type): **"This sentence, both in
form and substance, is a lie inserted by Marx."**

Marx, to whom the number of *Concordia* was sent the following May,
answered the anonymous author in the *Volksstaat* of June 1st. As he
could not recall which newspaper report he had used for the quotation,
he limited himself to citing, first the equivalent quotation from two
English publications, and then the report in *The Times*, according to
which Gladstone says:

"That is the state of the case as regards the wealth of this country. I
must say for one, I should look almost with apprehension and with pain
upon this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power, if it were my
belief that it was confined to classes who are in easy circumstances.
This takes no cognisance at all of the condition of the labouring
population. The augmentation I have described and which is founded, I
think, upon accurate returns, is an augmentation entirely confined to
classes possessed of property."

Thus Gladstone says here that he would be sorry if it were so, but it
''is ''so: this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power is
entirely confined to classes of property. And as to the semi-official
Hansard, Marx goes on to say: "In the version which he afterwards
manipulated [zurechtgestümpert], Mr. Gladstone was astute enough to
obliterate [wegzupfuschen] this passage, which, coming from an English
Chancellor of the Exchequer, was certainly compromising. This, by the
way, is a traditional usage in the English parliament and not an
invention gotten up by little Lasker against Bebel."

The anonymous writer gets angrier and angrier. In his answer in
*Concordia*, July 4th, he sweeps aside second-hand sources and demurely
suggests that it is the "custom" to quote parliamentary speeches from
the stenographic report; adding, however, that *The Times* report (which
includes the "falsified" sentence) and the Hansard report (which omits
it) are "substantially in complete agreement," while *The Times* report
likewise contains "the exact opposite to that notorious passage in the
*Inaugural Address*." This fellow carefully conceals the fact that *The
Times* report explicitly includes that self-same "notorious passage,"
alongside of its alleged "opposite." Despite all this, however, the
anonymous one feels that he is stuck fast and that only some new dodge
can save him. Thus, whilst his article bristles, as we have just shown,
with "impudent mendacity" and is interlarded with such edifying terms of
abuse as "bad faith," "dishonesty," "lying allegation," "that spurious
quotation," "impudent mendacity," "a quotation entirely falsified,"
"this falsification," "simply infamous," etc., he finds it necessary to
divert the issue to another domain and therefore promises "to explain in
a second article the meaning which we (the non-mendacious anonymous one)
attribute to the content of Gladstone's words." As if his particular
opinion, of no decisive value as it is, had anything whatever to do with
the matter. This second article was printed in *Concordia* on July 11th.

Marx replied again in the *Volksstaat* of August 7th now giving also the
reports of the passage in question from the *Morning Star* and the
*Morning Advertiser* of April 17, 1863. According to both reports
Gladstone said that he would look with apprehension, etc., upon this
intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power if he believed it to be
confined to "classes in easy circumstances." But this augmentation *was*
in fact "entirely confined to classes possessed of property." So these
reports too reproduced word for word the sentence alleged to have been
"lyingly inserted." Marx further established once more, by a comparison
of *The Times* and the Hansard texts, that this sentence, which three
newspaper reports of identical content, appearing independently of one
another the next morning, proved to have been really uttered, was
missing from the Hansard report, revised according to the familiar
"custom," and that Gladstone, to use Marx's words, "had afterwards
conjured it away." In conclusion Marx stated that he had no time for
further intercourse with the anonymous one. The latter also seems to
*have had enough, at any rate Marx received no further issues of*
Concordia.

With this the matter appeared to be dead and buried. True, once or twice
later on there reached us, from persons in touch with the University of
Cambridge, mysterious rumours of an unspeakable literary crime which
Marx was supposed to have committed in "Capital", but despite all
investigation nothing more definite could be learned. Then, on November
29, 1883, eight months after Marx's death, there appeared in *The Times*
a letter headed Trinity College, Cambridge, and signed Sedley Taylor, in
which this little man, who dabbles in the mildest sort of co-operative
affairs, seizing upon some chance pretext or other, at last enlightened
us, not only concerning those vague Cambridge rumours, but also the
anonymous one in *Concordia*.

"What appears extremely singular," says the little man from Trinity
College, "is that it was reserved for *Professor Brentano* (then of the
University of Breslau, now of that of Strassburg) to expose... the bad
faith which had manifestly dictated the citation made from Mr.
Gladstone's speech in the [Inaugural] Address. Herr Karl Marx, who ...
attempted to defend the citation, had the hardihood, in the deadly
shifts to which Brentano's masterly conduct of the attack speedily
reduced him, to assert that Mr. Gladstone had 'manipulated' the report
of his speech in *The Times* of April 17, 1863, before it appeared in
Hansard, in order to 'obliterate' a passage which 'was certainly
compromising' for an English Chancellor of the Exchequer. On Brentano's
showing, by a detailed comparison of texts, that the reports of *The
Times* and of Hansard agreed in utterly excluding the meaning which
craftily isolated quotation had put upon Mr. Gladstone's words, Marx
withdrew from further controversy under the plea of 'want of time.'"

So that was at the bottom of the whole business! And thus was the
anonymous campaign of Herr Brentano in *Concordia* gloriously reflected
in the productively co-operating imagination of Cambridge. Thus he
stood, sword in hand, and thus he battled, in his "masterly conduct of
the attack," this St. George of the German Manufacturers' Association,
whilst the infernal dragon Marx, "in deadly shifts," "speedily" breathed
his last at his feet.

All this Ariostian battle-scene, however, only serves to conceal the
dodges of our St. George. Here there is no longer talk of "lying
insertion" or "falsification," but of "craftily isolated quotation." The
whole issue was shifted, and St. George and his Cambridge squire very
well knew why.

Eleanor Marx replied in the monthly journal *To-day* (February 1884),
*as The Times* refused to publish her letter. She once more focussed the
debate on the sole question at issue: had Marx "lyingly inserted" that
sentence or not? To this Mr. Sedley Taylor answered that "the question
whether a particular sentence did or did not occur in Mr. Gladstone's
speech" had been, in his opinion, "of very subordinate importance" in
the Brentano-Marx controversy, "compared to the issue whether the
quotation in dispute was made with the intention of conveying, or of
perverting Mr. Gladstone's meaning." He then admits *that The Times*
report contains "a verbal contrariety"; but, if the context is rightly
interpreted, *i.e.,* in the Gladstonian Liberal sense, it shows what Mr.
Gladstone *meant* to say. (*To-day*, March, 1884.) The most comic point
here is that our little Cambridge man now insists upon quoting the
speech not from Hansard, as, according to the anonymous Brentano, it is-
"customary" to do, but from *The Times* report, which the same Brentano
had characterised as "necessarily bungling." Naturally so, for in
Hansard the vexatious sentence is missing.

Eleanor Marx had no difficulty (in the same issue of *To-day*) in
dissolving all this argumentation into thin air. Either Mr. Taylor had
read the controversy of 1872, in which case he was now making not only
"lying insertions" but also "lying" suppressions; or he had not read it
and ought to remain silent. In either case it was certain that he did
not dare to maintain for a moment the accusation of his friend Brentano
that Marx had made a "lying" addition. On the contrary, Marx, it now
seems, had not lyingly added but suppressed an important sentence. But
this same sentence is quoted on page 5 of the *Inaugural Address*, a few
lines before the alleged "lying insertion." And as to the "contrariety"
in Gladstone's speech, is it not Marx himself, who in "Capital," p. 618
(3rd edition, p. 672), note 105 [present edition, p. 611, Note 1],
refers to "the continual crying contradictions in Gladstone's Budget
speeches of 1863 and 1864"? Only he does not presume à la Mr. Sedley
Taylor to resolve them into complacent Liberal sentiments. Eleanor Marx,
in concluding her reply, finally sums up as follows:

"Marx has not suppressed anything worth quoting, neither has he
'lyingly' added anything. But he has restored, rescued from oblivion, a
particular sentence of one of Mr. Gladstone's speeches, a sentence which
had indubitably been pronounced, but which somehow or other had found
its way  out of Hansard."

With that Mr. Sedley Taylor too had had enough, and the result of this
whole professorial cobweb, spun out over two decades and two great
countries, is that nobody has since dared to cast any other aspersion
upon Marx's literary honesty; whilst Mr. Sedley Taylor, no doubt, will
hereafter put as little confidence in the literary war bulletins of Herr
Brentano as Herr Brentano will in the papal infallibility of Hansard.

**''Frederick Engels**''\
**London.**\
**June 25. 1890**

* * * * *

#### Footnotes

<span class="note"></span> In the English edition of 1887 this addition
was made by Engels himself.  Ed.

<span class="note"></span> In the present edition they are put into
square brackets and marked with the initials

<span class="note"></span> Marx was not mistaken in the title of the
book but in the page. He put down 36 instead of 37. (See p.p. 560-61 of
the present edition.)  Ed.

 

* * * * *

Transcribed by Bert Shultz\
 Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

### 1867: Marx's thank you letter to Engels

"16 August 1867 2 a.m.

"Dear Fred,

"Have just finished correcting the *last sheet* (49th) of the book. ...
So, *this volume is finished.* I owe it to *you* alone that it was
possible! Without your self-sacrifice for me I could not possibly have
managed the immense labour demanded by the 3 volumes. I embrace you,
full of thanks! ...

"Salut, my dear, valued friend.

"K. Marx."

* * * * *

[fr:Le Capital](fr:Le Capital "wikilink") <ja:資本論> [pt:Em Tradução:O
Capital](pt:Em Tradução:O Capital "wikilink")

<Category:Economics>
